# Life_Satisfaction_UKHLS

Within the UK and internationally, there has been a movement away from focusing solely on the financial aspects of a country’s growth and development, to supplementing these indicators with measurements of societal well-being (Barrington-Leigh 2021). To monitor and evaluate well-being levels and outcomes, the UK Government has set up the Measuring National Well-being Programme, an initiative to ensure policy decisions are evidence-based and that changes are being tracked over time (Office for National Statistics, 2024). As life satisfaction and well-being are a key concern for countries and Governments internationally, it is not surprising that there is a vast amount of literature on the subject. Predominantly, the literature focuses on traditional statistical analysis methods to evidence correlations or cause and effect of life satisfaction and other variables. One of the most recent and relevant examples to this research is a study considering life satisfaction in UK emerging adults during the pandemic (Li and Gutman, 2024). However, in more recent years, machine learning models and techniques have been applied to predict the life satisfaction of adults in Europe. The UK Centre for Economic Performance (UKCEP) considered life satisfaction across the UK, using the British Cohort Study, and a similar study of loneliness has been completed in Scotland (Clark et al., 2022; Osawa et al., 2022). Additionally, UKCEP have completed a machine learning longitudinal study, which considers factors predicting well-being across the UK, in comparison to two other European countries (Oparina et al., 2022). 

Living a satisfying, happy and meaningful life is important to most people, and is a goal of public policy due to the multitude of social benefits associated with high life satisfaction. However, understanding whether correlates of life satisfaction are the cause or the effect, and are therefore bidirectional, is not always straightforward (Marquez et al., 2023). In some cases, it may be that the variables associated with life satisfaction are both drivers and affects and are therefore bi-directional in nature. For example, trust in community positively predicts life satisfaction, and life satisfaction likewise predicts trust in community (Zhang, 2020). Yet other studies have found relationships that are not bidirectional, such as in the case of health predicting life satisfaction in older adults, but life satisfaction not predicting health (Moreno-Agostino, Abad \& Caballero, 2022). A common difficulty is that studies within this research area are mostly cross-sectional, and therefore unsuitable for inferring cause and effect, and unfortunately, longitudinal studies are sparse. For this reason, much of the research cited here is in relation to associations, as opposed to cause and effect relationships. 

There are numerous variables that influence, or are associated with, life satisfaction, including socio-demographic factors, which are often referred to as objective variables, and psychological characteristics, which are mentioned frequently as subjective variables. Subjective indicators demonstrate how an individual assesses and evaluates multiple domains of their life, whilst objective factors represent the physical and tangible aspects of people’s lives that are there to meet their needs, which in turn enhance their well-being. The subjective variables may include mental health variables and assessments of various domains of an individuals life, whilst life satisfaction as a whole concludes an integrated assessment of these different sub-components. For this reason, life satisfaction and the subjective variables often highly correlate (Fabian et al., 2021). 

If we first consider social life, those reporting higher life satisfaction are more likely to have a wide circle of friends and better-quality friendships (Amati et al., 2018). The social skills gained through these interpersonal relationships, such as cooperation and an ability to handle social stress, contribute to stronger relationships and an improvement in well-being (Amati et al., 2018). Furthermore, individuals reporting high life satisfaction are more likely to feel a sense of belonging and trust within their community (Hicks et al., 2013). A similar association has been shown between leisure activities and life satisfaction, indicating those with more leisure time may benefit from increased social interaction, resulting in higher well-being overall (Nimrod 2017). Research also indicates it is not just having leisure time itself that increases well-being, but how leisure time is spent (Mutz et al., 2020). If leisure time is spent performing physical activity, and in particular physical activity which fosters healthy social interactions among groups, this positively correlates with life satisfaction (Mutz et al., 2020). This also increases satisfaction with other domains of an individual’s life, such as their health, body, and appearance (Mutz et al., 2020). Increased physical activity during free time has also been proven to have a positive spillover effect on employment outcomes and well-being at work (Hecht \& Boies 2009).

There is a wide range of research considering the association with life satisfaction, employment, and occupational success, reasons of which relate to higher income, a sense of meaning and purpose, and social benefits of working (Dimari et al., 2019). On the other hand, having a reduced work capacity due to poor physical and/or mental health is associated with lower life satisfaction (Bakkeli 2021). It is not just employment that benefits well-being, but the nature of employment itself affects how satisfied individuals are with their jobs, which impacts their life satisfaction (Charles-Leija et al., 2023). A sense of autonomy and self-determination during working hours is an important factor in job satisfaction. If work is a source of intellectual stimulation, personal development and recognition, it can contribute more to individuals’ well-being than leisure time which is low effort, nonphysical and lacks stimulation (Charles-Leija et al., 2023). The benefits of a happy and fruitful working environment have been evidenced to increase productivity, performance and retention in the workplace (Dimari et al., 2019; Charles-Leija et al., 2023). Happy and satisfied working individuals are also more likely to be friendly at work, develop good working relationships, and help others (Dimari et al., 2019). Overall, this helps to make working environments more pleasurable, reduce staff turnover costs and may improve the country’s economic performance overall (Dimari aet al., 2019). 

If we consider income and well-being, the associations between these two variables are more complex than initially thought, and recent research provides an understanding of how macroeconomics affects psychology. Researchers are mostly in broad agreement that life satisfaction increases with income at country level, and also within countries. Therefore, on average, as a countries GDP increases, so does its citizens life satisfaction, and as an individuals income increases, so does their life satisfaction (Killingsworth, 2021; Jebb et al., 2018). On the other hand, more recent evidence shows what is commonly referred to as the Easterlin Paradox - in high GDP countries, over a length of time, economic growth stops positively correlating with life satisfaction. Reasons for this vary, but one explanation may be that income does in fact predict life satisfaction, but that how happy this makes people is being masked by the sacrifices made in other areas, such as lack of leisure time or time spent with family (Clark 2015). High-income inequality is considered to be the reason we do not see an incline in life satisfaction in countries with high GDP, as such growth is only affecting a smaller minority of people (Ortiz-Ospina \& Roser, 2013/2024). Another factor very much related to this, which has been more thoroughly researched, is that people not only become used to their income over time, but they also compare themselves to their peers. For this reason, income rank has become a key focus in this area, over absolute income (Fitzroy 2022). Individuals who perceive their income as lower to their immediate social groups (in terms of age, gender and place) report lower life satisfaction (Yu 2019). This effect is larger in countries with high disposable income inequality. High disposable income inequality therefore reaches a critical tipping point, where in the earlier stages, individuals may feel the benefits of upward social mobility and perceive that their circumstances can improve with effort. However, once this rises beyond a certain level, negative effects, such as jealousy and unhappiness become dominant (Yu \& Wang, 2017).  

Another important factor associated with increased well-being and life satisfaction is an individual’s health outcomes and how these relate to increased longevity and life expectancy. Longitudinal studies have confirmed that high well-being contributes between four to ten years additional life expectancy, in comparison to those with low well-being (Pavot \& Diener, 2008). In another longitudinal UK study, those with higher well-being in earlier life were shown to have greater physical health in older ages (Zaninotto 2019). They were less likely to live with chronic health conditions or diseases (Zaninotto 2019). Those with higher life satisfaction are therefore not only living longer but living longer in good health. 

